
In  books  for  children,  which  influence  us  the  most— I  mean 
fiiiry  tales,  legends,  myths,  allegories— humor  is,  of  course,  woefully 
absent.  Horror  and  tragedy,  lust  and  cruelty,  seem  to  be  the  cardinal 
ingredients.    But  it  is  through  the  reading  of  these  boob  that  the 

*  See  Appendix. 
24  / 


THEY  WERE  ALIVE  AND  THEY  SPOKE  TO  MB 

imaginative  faculty  is  nourisheci.  As  we  grow  older,  fantasy  and 
imagination  become  increasingly  rare  to  find.  One  is  carried  along 
on  a  treadmill  which  grows  increasingly  monotonous.  The  mind 
becomes  so  dulled  that  it  takes  a  truly  extraordinary  book  to  rout 
one  out  of  a  state  of  indifference  or  apathy. 

With  childhood  reading  there  is  a  factor  of  significance  which  we 
arc  prone  to  forget — the  physical  ambiance  of  the  occasion.  How 
distinctly,  in  after  years,  one  remembers  the  feel  of  a  favorite  book, 
the  typography,  the  binding,  the  illustrations,  and  so  on.  How  easily 
one  can  locaHze  the  time  and  place  of  a  first  reading.  Some  books 
are  associated  with  illness,  some  with  bad  weather,  some  with 
punishment,  some  with  reward.  In  the  remembrance  of  these 
events  the  inner  and  outer  worlds  fiise.  These  readings  are  distinctly 
"  events  "  in  one's  life. 

There  is  one  thing,  moreover,  which  differentiates  the  reading 
done  in  childhood  firom  later  reading,  and  that  is  the  absence  of 
choice.  The  books  one  reads  as  a  child  arc  thrust  upon  one.  Lucky 
the  child  who  has  wise  parents  !  So  powerful,  however,  is  the 
dominion  of  certain  books  that  even  the  ignorant  parent  can  hardly 
avoid  them.  What  child  has  not  read  Sinhad  the  Sailor,  Jason  and 
the  Golden  Fleece,  All  Baba  and  the  Forty  Thieves,  the  Fairy  Tales 
of  Grimm  and  Andersen,  Robinson  Crusoe,  Gulliver's  Travels  and 
such  like  i 

Who  also,  I  ask,  has  not  enjoyed  the  uncanny  thrill  which  comes 
later  in  life  on  rereading  his  early  favorites  ?  Only  recently,  after 
the  lapse  of  almost  fifty  years,  I  reread  Henty's  Lion  of  the  North. 
What  an  experience  !  As  a  boy,  Henty  was  my  favorite  author. 
Every  Christmas  my  parents  would  give  me  eight  or  ten  of  his 
books.  I  must  have  read  every  blessed  one  before  I  was  fourteen. 
Today,  and  I  regard  this  as  phenomenal,  I  can  pick  up  any  book 
of  his  and  get  the  same  fascinating  pleasure  I  got  as  a  boy. 
He  does  not  seem  to  be  **  talking  down  "  to  his  reader.  He  seems, 
rather,  to  be  on  intimate  terms  with  him.  Everyone  knows,  I 
presume,  that  Henty*s  books  arc  historical  romances.  To  the  lads 
of  my  day  they  were  vitally  important,  because  they  gave  us  our 
first  perspective  of  world  history.  The  Lion  of  the  North,  for  instance, 
is  about  Gustavus  Adolphus  and  the  Thirty  Years*  War.  In  it 
appears  that  strange,  enigmatic  figure— Wallenstein.     When,  just 

25 


The   books   in   my   lif£ 

the  other  day,  I  came  upon  the  pages  dealing  with  Wallenstein, 
it  was  as  though  I  had  read  them  only  a  few  months  ago.  As  I 
remarked  in  a  letter  to  a  friend,  after  closing  the  book,  it  was  in 
these  pages  about  Wallenstein  that  I  first  encountered  the  words 
"  destiny  *'  and  "  astrology."  Pregnant  words,  for  a  boy.  at  any 
rate. 

I  began  by  speaking  of  my  "  hbrary."  Only  lately  I  had  the 
pleasure  of  reading  about  the  Hfe  and  times  of  Montaigne.  Like 
ours,  his  was  an  age  of  intolerance,  persecution,  and  wholesale 
massacres.  I  had  often  heard,  to  be  sure,  of  Montaigne's  withdrawal 
from  active  Hfe,  of  his  devotion  to  books,  of  his  quiet,  sober  life, 
so  rich  in  inward  ways.  There,  of  course,  was  a  man  who  could 
be  said  to  possess  a  Hbrary  !  For  a  moment  I  envied  him.  If,  I 
thought  to  myself,  I  could  have  in  this  Uttle  room,  right  at  my 
elbow,  all  the  books  which  I  cherished  as  a  child,  a  boy,  a  young 
man,  how  fortunate  I  would  be  !  It  was  always  my  habit  to  mark 
excessively  the  books  I  liked.  How  wonderful  it  would  be,  thought 
I,  to  see  those  markings  again,  to  know  what  were  my  opinions 
and  reactions  in  that  long  ago.  I  thought  of  Arnold  Bennett,  of 
the  excellent  habit  he  had  formed  of  inserting  at  the  back  of  every 
book  he  read  a  few  blank  pages  whereon  he  might  record  his  notes 
and  impressions  as  he  went  along.  One  is  always  curious  to  know 
what  one  was  like,  how  one  behaved,  how  one  reacted  to  thoughts 
and  events,  at  various  periods  in  the  past.  In  the  marginal  annota- 
tions of  books  one  can  easily  discover  one's  former  selves. 

When  one  realizes  the  tremendous  evolution  of  one's  being  which 
occurs  in  a  lifetime  one  is  bound  to  ask  :  "  Does  life  cease  vwth 
bodily  death  i  Have  I  not  Hved  before  ?  Will  I  not  appear  again 
on  earth  or  perhaps  on  some  other  planet  i  Am  I  not  truly  imperish- 
able, as  is  all  else  in  the  universe  t "  Perhaps,  too,  one  may  be 
impelled  to  ask  himself  a  still  more  important  question  :  "  Did  I 
learn  my  lesson  liere  on  earth  ?  " 

Montaigne,  I  noticed  with  pleasure,  speaks  frequently  of  his 
bad  memory.  He  says  that  he  was  unable  to  recall  the  contents, 
or  even  his  impressions,  of  certain  books,  many  of  which  he  had 
read  not  once  but  several  times.  I  feel  certain,  however,  that  he 
must  have  had  a  good  memory  in  other  respects.  Most  everyone 
has  a  faulty,  spotty  memory.  The  men  who  can  quote  copiously 
26  / 


THEY    WERE    ALIVE    AND     THEY    SPOKE     TO     Ml 

and  accurately  from  the  thousands  of  books  they  have  read,  who 
can  relate  the  plot  of  a  novel  in  detail,  who  can  give  names  and 
dates  of  historical  events,  and  so  on,  possess  a  monstrous  sort  of 
memory  which  has  always  seemed  repellent  to  me.  I  am  one  of 
those  who  have  a  weak  memory  in  certain  respects  and  a  strong 
one  in  others.  In  short,  just  the  kind  of  memory  which  is  useful 
for  me.  When  I  really  wish  to  recall  something  I  can,  though  it 
may  take  considerable  time  and  effort.  I  know  quietly  that  nothing 
is  lost.  But  I  know  also  that  it  is  important  to  cultivate  a  "  forget- 
tery."  The  flavor,  the  savor,  the  aroma,  the  ambiance,  as  well 
as  the  value  or  non-value  of  a  thing,  I  never  forget.  The  only  kind 
of  memory  I  wish  to  preserve  is  the  Proustian  sort.  To  know  that 
there  is  this  infaUible,  total,  exact  memory  is  sufficient  for  me. 
How  often  it  happens  that,  in  glancing  through  a  book  read  long 
ago,  one  stimibles  on  passages  whose  every  word  has  a  burning, 
inexhaustible,  unforgettable  resonance  i    Recently,  in  completing  y 

the  script  of  the  second  book  of  The  Rosy  Crucifixion,  I  was  obHged 
to  turn  to  my  notes,  made  many  years  ago,  on  Spengler's  Declitt^^ 
of  the  West.  There  were  certain  passages,  a  considerable  number, 
I  might  say,  of  which  I  had  only  to  read  the  opening  words  and 
the  rest  followed  Hke  music.  The  sense  of  the  words  had  lost,  in 
some  instances,  some  of  the  importance  I  once  attached  to  them, 
but  not  the  words  themselves.  Every  time  I  struck  these  passages, 
for  I  had  read  them  again  and  again,  the  language  became  more 
redolent,  more  pregnant,  more  charged  with  that  mysterious 
quality  which  every  great  author  embeds  in  his  language  and  which 
is  the  mark  of  his  uniqueness.  At  any  rate,  so  impressed  was  I  by 
the  vitality  and  hypnotic  character  of  these  Spenglerian  passages 
that  I  decided  to  quote  a  number  of  them  in  their  entirety.  It  was 
an  experiment  which  I  felt  obHged  to  conduct,  an  experiment 
between  myself  and  my  readers.  The  lines  I  chose  to  quote  had 
become  my  very  own  and  I  felt  that  they  had  to  be  transmitted. 
Were  they  not  every  bit  as  important  in  my  Hfe  as  the  haphazard 
encounters,  crises  and  events  which  I  had  described  as  my  own  ? 
Why  not  pass  Oswald  Spengler  on  intact  also  since  he  was  an 
event  in  my  life  ? 

I  am  one  of  those  readers  who,  from  time  to  time,  copy  out 
long  passages  from  the  b^<^ks  I  read.    I  find  these  citations  every- 

17 


\ 


THE     BOOKS     IN     MY     LIFE 


where  whenever  I  begin  going  through  my  belongings.  They 
are  never  at  my  elbow,  fortunately  or  unfortunately.  Sometimes 
I  spend  whole  days  trying  to  recollect  where  I  have  secreted  them. 
Thus,  the  other  day,  opening  one  of  my  Paris  notebooks  to  look 
for  something  else,  I  stimibled  on  one  of  those  passages  which  have 
hved  with  me  for  years.  It  is  by  Gautier  from  Havelock  Ellis*  Intro- 
duction to  Against  the  Grain.  It  begins  :  "  The  poet  of  the  Fleurs 
du  Mai  loved  what  is  improperly  called  the  style  of  decadence, 
and  which  is. nothing  else  but  art  arrived  at  that  point  of  extreme 
maturity  yielded  by  the  slanting  suns  of  aged  civilizations :  an 
ingenious,  compHcated  style,  full  of  shades  and  of  research,  con- 
stantly pushing  back  the  boundaries  of  speech,  borrowing  from 
all  the  technical  vocabularies,  taking  color  from  all  palettes  and 
notes  from  all  keyboards  ..."  Then  follows  a  sentence  which 
always  pops  up  Hke  a  flashing  semaphore  :  "  The  style  of  decadence 
is  the  ultimate  utterance  of  the  Word,  summoned  to  final  expression 
and  driven  to  its  last  hiding-place." 

Utterances  such  as  these  I  have  often  copied  out  in  large  letters 
and  placed  above  my  door  so  that,  in  leaving,  my  friends  would 
be  sure  to  read  them.  Some  people  have  the  opposite  compulsion 
— they  keep  these  precious  revelations  secret.  My  weakness  is  to 
shout  from  the  rooftop  whenever  I  beHeve  I  have  discovered  some- 
thing of  vital  importance.  On  finishing  a  wonderfril  book,  for 
example,  I  almost  always  sit  down  and  write  letters  to  my  friends, 
sometimes  to  the  author,  and  occasionally  to  the  publisher.  The 
experience  becomes  a  part  of  my  daily  conversation,  enters  into  the 
very  food  and  drink  I  consume.  I  called  this  a  weakness.  Perhaps 
it  is  not.  **  Increase  and  multiply  ! "  commanded  the  Lord. 
E.  Graham  Howe,  author  of  War  Dance,  put  it  another  way,  which 
I  like  even  better.  "  Create  and  share!"  he  counseled.  And,  though 
reading  may  not  at  first  blush  seem  like  an  act  of  creation,  in  a  deep 
sense  it  is.  Without  the  enthusiastic  reader,  who  is  really  the  author's 
coimterpart  and  very  often  his  most  secret  rival,  a  book  would  die. 
The  man  who  spreads  the  good  word  augments  not  only  the  life  of 
the  book  in  question  but  the  act  of  creation  itself.  He  breathes  spirit 
into  other  readers.  He  sustains  the  creative  spirit  everywhere. 
Whether  he  is  aware  of  it  or  not,  what  he  is  doing  is  praising  God's 
handiwork.  For,  the  good  reader,  like  the  good  author,  knows  that 

28 


THEY  WERE  ALIVE  AND  THEY  SPOKE  TO  ME 

everything  stems  from  the  same  source.  He  knows  that  he  could  not 
participate  in  the  author's  private  experience  were  he  not  composed 
of  the  same  substance  through  and  through.  And  when  I  say  author 
I  mean  Author.  The  writer  is,  of  course,  the  best  of  all  readers,  for  in 
writing,  or  **  creating,"  as  it  is  called,  he  is  but  reading  and  transcrib- 
ing the  great  message  of  creation  which  the  Creator  in  his  goodness 
has  made  manifest  to  him. 

In  the  Appendix  the  reader  will  find  a  list  of  authors  and  titles 
arranged  in  a  firank  and  curious  way.*  I  mention  it  because  I  think 
it  important  to  stress  at  the  outset  a  psychological  fact  about  the 
reading  of  books  which  is  rather  neglected  in  most  works  on  the 
subject.  It  is  this  :  many  of  the  books  one  Uves  with  in  one's  mind 
are  books  one  has  never  read.  Sometimes  these  take  on  amazing 
importance.  There  are  at  least  three  categories  of  this  order.  The 
first  comprises  those  books  which  one  has  every  intention  of  reading 
some  day  but  in  all  probability  never  will ;  the  second  comprises 
those  books  which  one  feels  he  ought  to  have  read,  and  which,  some 
at  least,  he  undoubtedly  will  read  before  he  dies  ;  the  third  comprises 
the  books  one  hears  about,  talks  about,  reads  about,  but  which  one 
is  almost  certain  never  to  read  because  nothing,  seemingly,  can  ever 
break  down  the  wall  of  prejudice  erected  against  them. 

In  the  first  category  are  those  monumental  works,  classics  mostly, 
which  one  is  usually  ashamed  to  admit  he  has  never  read :  tomes 
one  nibbles  at  occasionally,  only  to  push  them  away,  more  than  ever 
convinced  that  they  are  still  unreadable.  The  list  varies  with  the 
individual.  For  myself,  to  give  a  few  outstanding  names,  they 
comprise  the  works  of  such  celebrated  authors  as  Homer,  Aristotle, 
Francis  Bacon,  Hegel,  Rousseau  (excepting  Entile),  Robert  Brown- 
ing, Santayana.  In  the  second  category  I  include  Arabia  Deserta,  the 
Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire,  The  Hundred  and  Twenty  Days 
of  Sodom,  Casanova's  Memoirs,  Napoleon's  Memoirs,  Michelet's 
History  of  the  French  Revolution.  In  the  third  Pepys'  Diary,  Tristram 
Shandy,  Wilhelm  Meister,  The  Anatomy  of  Melancholy,  The  Red 
and  the  Black,  Marius  the  Epicurean,  The  Education  of  Henry  Adams. 

Sometimes  a  chance  reference  to  an  author  one  has  neglected  to 
read  or  abandoned  all  thought  of  ever  reading — a  passage,  say,  in 
the  work  of  an  author  one  admires,  or  the  words  of  a  friend  who  is 

*  That  is,  those  I  have  read  and  those  I  still  hope  to  read. 

29 


THE    BOOKS    IN    MY    LIFE, 

ako  a  book  lover— is  sufficient  to  make  one  run  for  a  book,  read  it 
with  new  eyes  and  claim  it  as  one's  very  own.  In  the  main,  however, 
the  books  one  neglects,  or  deUberately  spurns,  seldom  get  read.  Cer- 
tain subjects,  certain  styles,  or  unfortunate  associations  connected  v^dth 
the  very  names  of  certain  books,  create  a  repugnance  almost 
insuperable.  Nothing  on  earth,  for  example,  could  induce  me  to 
tackle  anew  Spenser's  Faery  Queen,  which  I  began  in  college  and 
fortunately  dropped  because  I  left  that  institution  in  a  hurry.  Never 
again  will  I  look  at  a  line  of  Edmund  Burke,  or  Addison,  or  Chaucer, 
though  the  last-named  I  think  altogether  worthy  of  reading.  Racine 
and  Comeille  are  two  others  I  doubt  if  I  shall  ever  look  at  again, 
though  Comeille  intrigues  me  because  of  a  brilliant  essay  I 
read  not  long  ago  on  Phldre  in  The  Cloums  Grail*  On  the 
other  hand  there  are  books  which  He  at  the  very  foundations 
^  of  literature  but  which  are  so  remote  from  one's  thinking 
'  and  experience  as  to  render  them  "  untouchable."  Certain 
authors,  supposed  to  be  the  bulwark  of  our  particular  Western 
culture,  are  more  foreign  in  spirit  to  me  than  are  the  Chinese, 
the  Arabs,  or  primitive  peoples.  Some  of  the  most  exciting 
Hterary  works  spring  from  cultures  which  have  not  contributed 
directly  to  our  development.  No  fairy  tales,  for  example,  have 
/--v  exercised  a  more  potent  influence  over  me  than  those  of  the  Japanese, 
r^  which  I  became  acquainted  with  through  the  work  of  Lafcadio 
Heam,  one  of  the  exotic  figures  in  American  Hterature.  No  stories 
were  more  seductive  to  me  as  a  child  than  those  drawn  from  the 
Arabian  Nights*  Entertainment.  American  Indian  folklore  leaves  me 
cold,  whereas  the  folklore  of  Afiica  is  near  and  dear  to  me.f  And, 
as  I  have  said  repeatedly,  whatever  I  read  of  Chinese  Uterature 
(barring  Confiidus)  seems  as  if  written  by  my  immediate  ancestors. 
I  said  that  sometimes  it  is  an  esteemed  author  who  puts  one  on 
the  track  of  a  buried  book.  **  What!  He  liked  that  book?"  you 
say  to  yourself,  and  immediately  the  barriers  fall  away  and  the  mind 
becomes  not  only  open  and  receptive  but  positively  aflame.  Often 
it  happens  that  it  is  not  a  friend  of  similar  tastes  who  revives  one's 
interest  in  a  dead  book  but  a  chance  acquaintance.   Sometimes  this 

*  By  Wallace  Fowlie.  Sub-title  :  A  Study  of  Love  ht  its  Literary  Expression  ; 
Dennis  Dobson,  Ltd.,  London,  1947. 
t  See  Cendrars*  African  Anthology. 

30 


THEY  WERE  ALIVE  AND  THEY  SPOKE  TO  ME 

individual  gives  the  impression  of  being  a  nitwit,  and  one  wonders 
why  he  should  retain  the  memory  of  a  book  which  this  person 
casually  recommended,  or  perhaps  did  not  recommend  at  all  but 
merely  mentioned  in  the  course  of  conversation  as  being  an  **  odd  " 
book.  In  a  vacant  mood,  at  loose  ends,  as  we  say,  suddenly  the 
recollection  of  this  conversation  occurs,  and  we  are  ready  to  give  the 
book  a  trial.  Then  comes  a  hock,  the  shock  of  discovery.  Wuthering 
Heights  is  for  me  an  example  of  this  sort.  From  having  heard  it 
praised  so  much  and  so  often,  I  had  concluded  that  it  was  impossible 
for  an  English  novel — ^by  a  woman  ! — to  be  that  good.  Then  one 
day  a  friend,  whose  taste  I  suspected  to  be  shallow,  let  drop  a  few 
pregnant  words  about  it.  Though  I  promptly  proceeded  to  forget 
his  remarks,  the  poison  sank  into  me.  Without  realizing  it,  I  nur- 
tured a  secret  resolve  to  have  a  look  at  this  famous  book  one  day. 
Finally,  just  a  few  years  ago,  Jean  Varda  put  it  in  my  hands.*  I 
read  it  in  one  gulp,  astoimded  as  is  everyone,  I  suspect,  by  its  amazing 
power  and  beauty.  Yes,  one  of  the  very  great  novels  in  the  EngHsh 
language.  And  I,  through  pride  and  prejudice,  had  almost  missed 
reading  it. 

Quite  another  story  is  that  of  The  City  of  God.  Many  years  ago 
I  had,  like  everyone  else,  read  the  Confessions  of  St.  Augustine.  And 
it  had  made  a  deep  impression.  Then,  in  Paris,  some  one  thrust 
upon  me  The  City  of  God^  in  two  volumes.  I  found  it  not  only 
boring  and  deadly,  but  in  parts  monstrously  ridiculous.  An  English 
bookseller,  hearing  from  a  mutual  friend — to  his  surprise,  no  doubt — 
that  I  had  read  this  work  informed  me  that  he  could  get  a  good 
price  for  it  if  I  would  only  annotate  it.  I  sat  down  to  read  it  once 
again,  taking  elaborate  pains  to  make  copious  remarks,  usually 
derogatory,  in  the  margins  ;  after  spending  a  month  or  so  at  this 
vain  task  I  dispatched  the  book  to  England.  Twenty  years  later  I 
received  a  post  card  from  this  same  bookseller  stating  that  he  hoped 
to  sell  the  copy  in  a  few  days — ^he  had  found  a  buyer  for  it  at  last. 
And  that  was  the  last  I  heard  from  him.  Droie  d'histoire  ! 

Throughout  my  Hfe  the  word  **  confessions  "  in  a  title  has  alwa)^ 
acted  like  a  magnet.  I  mentioned  Strindberg's  Confession  of  a  Fool,  i 
I  should  also  have  mentioned  Marie  BashkirtsefF's  famous  work 


U 


*  He  also  put  into  my  hands  another  amazing  book,  Hebdomeros,  by  the 
painter,  Giorgio  di  Chirico. 

31 


THE    BOOKS    IN    MY    LIFE 

and  the  Confessions  of  Two  Brothers  by  Powys.  There  are  some  very 
celebrated  confessions,  however,  which  I  have  never  been  able  to 
wade  through.  One  is  Rousseau's,  another  is  de  Quincey's.  Only 
recently  I  took  another  stab  at  Rousseau's  Confessions,  but  after  a 
few  pages  was  forced  to  abandon  it.  His  Emile,  on  the  other  hand,  I 
fully  intend  to  read— when  I  can  find  a  copy  with  readable  type. 
The  Httle  I  did  read  of  it  had  an  extraordinary  appeal. 

I  beheve  they  are  woefully  mistaken  who  assert  that  the  founda- 
tions of  knowledge  or  culture,  or  any  foundations  whatsoever,  are 
necessarily  those  classics  which  arc  found  in  every  list  of  **  best " 
books.  I  know  that  there  are  several  universities  which  base  their 
entire  curricula  on  such  select  lists.  It  is  my  opinion  that  each  man 
has  to  dig  his  own  foundations.  If  one  is  an  individual  at  all  it  is  by 
reason  of  his  uniqueness.  Whatever  the  material  which  vitally 
aflfected  the  form  of  our  culture,  each  man  must  decide  for  himself 
which  elements  of  it  are  to  enter  into  and  shape  his  own  private 
destiny.  The  great  works  which  are  singled  out  by  the  professorial 
minds  represent  their  choice  exclusively.  It  is  in  the  nature  of  such 
intellects  to  beheve  that  they  are  our  appointed  guides  and  mentors. 
It  may  be  that,  if  left  to  our  own  devices,  we  would  in  time  share 
their  point  of  view.  But  the  surest  way  to  defeat  such  an  end  is  to 
promulgate  the  reading  of  select  lists  of  books — the  so-called  founda- 
tion stones.  A  man  should  begin  with  his  own  times.  He  should 
become  acquainted  first  of  all  with  the  world  in  which  he  is  Uving 
and  participating.  He  should  not  be  afraid  of  reading  too  much  or 
too  Uttle.  He  should  take  his  reading  as  he  docs  his  food  or  his 
exercise.  The  good  reader  will  gravitate  to  the  good  books.  He  will 
discover  firom  his  contemporaries  what  is  inspiring  or  fecundating,  or 
merely  enjoyable,  in  past  Hterature.  He  should  have  the  pleasure 
of  making  these  discoveries  on  his  own,  in  his  own  way.  What  has 
worth,  charm,  beauty,  wisdom,  cannot  be  lost  or  forgotten.  But 
things  can  lose  all  value,  all  charm  and  appeal,  if  one  is  dragged  to 
them  by  the  scalp.  Have  you  not  noticed,  after  many  heart-aches  and 
disillusionments,  that  in  recommending  a  book  to  a  friend  the  less 
said  the  better  i  The  moment  you  praise  a  book  too  highly  you 
awaken  resistance  in  your  listener.  One  has  to  know  when  to  give 
the  dose  and  how  much — and  if  it  is  to  be  repeated  or  not.  The 
gurus  of  India  and  Tibet,  it  is  often  pointed  out,  have  for  ages 
32 


THBY  WERE  ALIVE  AND  THBY  SPOKE  TO  MB 

practiced  the  high  art  o(  discouraging  their  ardent  would-be  disciples. 
The  same  sort  of  strategy  might  well  be  applied  where  the  reading 
of  books  is  concerned.  Discourage  a  man  in  the  right  way,  that  is, 
with  the  right  end  in  view,  and  you  will  put  him  on  the  path  that 
much  more  quickly.  The  important  thing  is  not  which  books,  which 
experiences,  a  man  is  to  have,  but  what  he  puts  into  them  of  his  own. 
One  of  the  most  mysterious  of  all  the  intangibles  in  Hfe  is  what  we 
call  influences.  Undoubtedly  influences  come  under  the  law  of 
attraction.  But  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  when  we  are 
pulled  in  a  certain  direction  it  is  also  because  we  pushed  in  that 
direction,  perhaps  without  knowing  it.  It  is  obvious  that  we  are  not 
at  the  mercy  of  any  and  every  influence.  Nor  are  we  always  cogni- 
zant of  the  forces  and  factors  which  influence  us  from  one  period  to 
another.  Some  men  never  know  themselves  or  what  motivates  their 
behavior.  Most  men,  in  fact.  With  others  the  sense  of  destiny  is  so 
clear,  so  strong,  that  there  hardly  seems  to  be  any  choice  :  they  1 
create  the  influences  needed  to  fulfill  their  ends.  I  use  the  word  i 
"  create "  deHberately,  because  in  certain  startling  instances  the  j 
individual  has  literally  been  obUged  to  create  the  necessary  influences.  ^ 
We  are  on  strange  grounds  here.  My  reason  for  introducing  such 
an  abstruse  element  is  that,  where  books  are  concerned,  just  as  with 
friends,  lovers,  adventures  and  discoveries,  all  is  inextricably  mixed. 
The  desire  to  read  a  book  is  often  provoked  by  the  most  unexpected 
incident.  To  begin  with,  everything  that  happens  to  a  man  is  of  a 
piece.  The  books  he  chooses  to  read  are  no  exception.  He  may 
have  read  Plutarch's  Liues  or  The  Fifteen  Decisive  Battles  of  the 
World  because  a  doting  aimt  thrust  them  under  his  nose.  He  may 
not  have  read  them  if  he  detested  this  aunt.  Of  the  thousands  of  . 
titles  which  come  under  one's  ken,  even  early  in  hfe,  how  is  it  that 
one  individual  steers  straight  towards  certain  authors  and  another 
towards  others  ?  The  books  a  man  reads  are  determined  by  what  a 
man  is.  If  a  man  be  left  alone  in  a  room  with  a  book,  a  single  book,  it 
does  not  follow  that  he  will  read  it  because  he  has  nothing  better  to 
do.  If  the  book  bores  him  he  will  drop  it,  though  he  may  go  well- 
nigh  mad  for  want  of  anything  better  to  do.  Some  men,  in  reading, 
take  the  pains  to  look  up  every  reference  given  in  the  foomotes  ; 
others  again  never  even  glance  at  footnotes.  Some  men  will  under- 
take arduous  journeys  to  read  a  book  whose  title  alone  has  intrigued 

33 


THE    BOOKS    IN    MY    LIFE 

them.  The  adventures  and  discoveries  of  Nicholas  Flamel  in  connec- 
tion with  the  Book  of  Abraham  the  Jew  constitute  one  of  the  golden 
pages  in  literature. 

As  I  was  saying,  the  chance  remark  of  a  friend,  an  unexpected 
encounter,  a  footnote,  illness,  solitude,  strange  quirks  of  memory, 
a  thousand  and  one  things  can  set  one  off  in  pursuit  of  a  book.  There 
are  times  when  one  is  susceptible  to  any  and  all  suggestions,  hints, 
intimations.  And  there  are  times  again  when  it  takes  dynamite  to 
put  one  afoot  and  astir. 

One  of  the  great  temptations,  for  a  writer,  is  to  read  when  engaged 
in  the  writing  of  a  book.  With  me  it  seems  that  the  moment  I 
begin  a  new  book  I  develop  a  passion  for  reading  too.  In  fact,  due 
to  some  perverse  instinct,  the  moment  I  am  launched  on  a  new  book 
I  itch  to  do  a  thousand  different  things — not,  as  is  often  the  case,  out 
of  a  desire  to  escape  the  task  of  writing.  What  I  fmd  is  that  I  can 
write  and  do  other  things.  When  the  creative  urge  seizes  one — at 
least,  such  is  my  experience — one  becomes  creative  in  all  directions 
at  once. 

It  was  in  the  days  before  I  undertook  to  write,  I  must  confess,  that 
reading  was  at  once  the  most  voluptuous  and  the  most  pernicious 
of  pastimes.  Looking  backward,  it  seems  to  me  as  if  the  reading  of 
books  was  nothing  more  than  a  narcotic,  stimulating  at  first  but 
depressing  and  paralyzing  afterwards.  From  the  time  I  began 
in  earnest  to  write,  the  reading  habit  altered.  A  new  element  crept 
into  it.  A  fecundating  element,  I  might  say.  As  a  young  man  I  often 
thought,  on  putting  a  book  down,  that  I  could  have  done  much 
better  myself  The  more  I  read  the  more  critical  I  became.  Hardly 
anything  was  good  enough  for  me.  Gradually  I  began  to  despise 
books — and  authors  too.  Often  the  writers  I  had  most  adored  were 
the  ones  I  castigated  mercilessly.  There  was  always  a  fringe  of 
authors,  to  be  sure,  whose  magic  powers  baffled  and  eluded  me.  As 
the  time  approached  for  me  to  assert  my  own  powers  of  expression 
I  began  to  reread  these  **  spellbinders  "  with  new  eyes.  I  read  cold- 
bloodedly, with  all  the  powers  of  analysis  I  possessed.  In  order, 
bcHeve  it  or  not,  to  rob  them  of  their  secret.  Yes,  I  was  then  naive 
enough  to  beUcve  that  I  could  discover  what  makes  the  clock  tick 
by  taking  it  apart.  Vain  and  foolish  though  my  behavior  was,  this 
period  stands  out,  nevertheless,  as  one  of  the  most  rewarding  of  all 
34 


THEY  WERE  ALIVE  AND  THEY  SPOKE  TO  ME 

my  bouts  with  books.  I  learned  something  about  style,  about  the 
art  of  narration,  about  effects  and  how  they  are  produced.  Best  of 
all,  I  learned  that  there  really  is  a  mystery  involved  in  the  creation 
of  good  books.  To  say,  for  example,  that  the  style  is  the  man,  is  to 
say  almost  nothing.  Even  when  we  have  the  man  we  have  next  to 
nothing.  The  way  a  man  writes,  the  way  he  speaks,  the  way  he 
walks,  the  way  he  does  everything,  is  unique  and  inscrutable.  The 
important  thing,  so  obvious  that  one  usually  overlooks  it,  is  not  to 
wonder  about  such  matters  but  to  listen  to  what  a  man  has  to  say, 
to  let  his  words  move  you,  alter  you,  make  you  more  and  more 
what  you  truly  are. 

The  most  important  factor  in  the  appreciation  of  any  art  is  the 
practice  of  it.  There  is  the  wonder  and  intoxication  of  the  child  when 
it  first  encounters  the  world  of  books  ;  there  is  the  ecstasy  and 
despair  of  youth  in  discovering  his  **  own  "  authors  ;  but  greater 
than  these,  because  combined  with  them  are  other  more  permanent 
and  quickening  elements,  are  the  perceptions  and  reflections  of  a 
mature  being  who  has  dedicated  his  Hfe  to  the  task  of  creation.  In 
reading  Van  Gogh's  letters  to  his  brother,  one  is  struck  by  the  vast 
amount  of  meditation,  analysis,  comparison,  adoration  and  criticism 
he  indulged  in  during  the  course  of  his  brief  and  frenzied  career  as  a 
painter.  It  is  not  uncommon,  among  painters,  but  in  Van  Gogh's 
case  it  reaches  heroic  proportions.  Van  Gogh  was  not  only  looking 
at  nature,  people,  objects,  but  at  other  men's  canvases,  studying  their 
methods,  techniques,  styles  and  approaches.  He  reflected  long  and 
earnestly  on  what  he  observed,  and  these  thoughts  and  observations 
penetrated  his  work.  He  was  anything  but  a  primitive,  or  a  "  fauve." 
Like  Rimbaud,  he  was  nearer  to  being  "  a  mystic  in  the  wild  state." 

It  is  not  altogether  by  accident  that  I  have  chosen  a  painter  rather 
than  a  writer  to  illustrate  my  point.  It  happens  that  Van  Gogh, 
without  having  any  literary  pretensions  whatever,  wrote  one  of  the 
great  books  of  our  time,  and  without  knowing  that  he  was  writing 
a  book.  His  life,  as  we  get  it  in  the  letters,  is  more  revelatory,  more 
moving,  more  a  work  of  art,  I  would  say,  than  are  most  of  the 
famous  autobiographies  or  autobiographical  novels.  He  tells  us 
unreservedly  of  his  struggles  and  sorrows,  withholding  nothing. 
He  displays  his  rare  knowledge  of  the  painter's  craft,  though  he  is 
acclaimed  more  for  his  passion  and  his  vision  than  for  his  knowledge 

35 


THE     BOOKS     IN    MY    LIFE 

of  the  medium.  His  life,  in  that  it  makes  clear  the  value  and  the 
meaning  of  dedication,  is  a  lesson  for  all  time.  Van  Gogh  is  at  one 
and  the  same  time — and  of  how  few  men  can  we  say  this  ! — the 
humble  disciple,  the  student,  the  lover,  the  brother  of  all  men,  the 
critic,  the  analyst,  and  the  doer  of  good  deeds.  He  may  have  been 
obsessed,  or  possessed  rather,  but  he  was  not  a  fanatic  working  in  the 
dark.  He  possessed,  for  one  thing,  that  rare  faculty  of  being  able  to 
criticize  and  judge  his  own  work.  He  proved,  indeed,  to  be  a  much 
better  critic  and  judge  than  those  whose  business  it  unfortunately 
is  to  criticize,  judge  and  condemn. 

The  more  I  write  the  more  I  understand  what  others  are  tryii^  to 
tell  me  in  their  books.  The  more  I  write  the  more  tolerant  I  grow , 
with  regard  to  my  fellow  writers.  (I  am  not  including  "  bad  " 
writers,  for  with  them  I  refuse  to  have  any  traffic.)  But  with  those 
who  are  sincere,  with  those  who  are  honestly  struggling  to  express 
themselves,  I  am  much  more  lenient  and  understanding  than  in  the 
days  when  I  had  not  yet  written  a  book.  I  can  learn  from  the  poorest 
writer,  provided  he  has  done  his  utmost.  Indeed,  I  have  learned  a 
very  great  deal  from  certain  "  poor  "  writers.  In  reading  their  works 
I  have  been  struck  time  and  again  by  that  freedom  and  boldness 
which  it  is  almost  impossible  to  recapture  once  one  is  "  in  harness," 
once  one  is  aware  of  the  laws  and  limitations  of  his  medium.  But 
it  is  in  reading  one's  favorite  authors  that  one  becomes  supremely 
aware  of  the  value  of  practicing  the  art  of  writing.  One  reads  then 
with  the  right  and  the  left  eye.  Without  the  least  diminution  of  the 
sheer  enjoyment  of  reading,  one  becomes  aware  of  a  marvellous 
heightening  of  conscioumess.  In  reading  these  men  the  element  of  the 
mysterious  never  recedes,  but  the  vessel  in  which  their  thoughts  are 
contained  becomes  more  and  more  transparent.  Drunk  with 
ecstasy,  one  returns  to  his  own  work  revivified.  Criticism  is  con- 
verted into  reverence.  One  begins  to  pray  as  one  never  prayed 
before.  One  no  longer  prays  for  oneself  but  for  Brother  Giono, 
Brother  Cendrars,  Brother  Celine — for  the  whole  galaxy  of  fellow 
authors,  in  fact.  One  accepts  the  uniqueness  of  his  fellow  artist 
imreservedly,  realizing  that  it  is  only  through  one's  uniqueness  that 
one  asserts  his  commonness.  One  no  longer  asks  for  something 
different  of  his  beloved  author  but  for  more  of  the  same.  Even  the 
ordinary  reader  testifies  to  this  longing.  Does  he  not  say,  on  finishing 
36 


THBY    WERE     ALIVE    AND     THEY    SPOKE     TO    ME 

the  last  volume  of  his  favorite  author  :   "If  only  he  had  written  a 
few  more  books  ! "   When,  after  an  author  is  dead  some  time,  a 
forgotten  manuscript  is  dug  up,  or  a  bundle  of  letters,  or  an  un- 
known diary,  what  a  cry  of  exultation  goes  up  !  What  gratitude  for 
even  the  tiniest  posthumous  fragment  !    Even  the  perusal  of  an 
